O'Customer, Why Art Thou Going?

A Study on Understanding and Predicting Customer Churn

Project Overview

This project aims to analyse customer churn in the telecommunications industry, focusing on how competition 
and market factors impact customer retention. Using data analytics and machine learning techniques, we explore 
key indicators influencing churn and build predictive models to assist telecom companies in customer retention strategies.

Team Members

Lim Ern Khee Grace
Melvin Tjandradjaja
Priscilla Teo Jia En
Venecia Ng Shu Eng
Wong Hiu Man

Background

With the introduction of Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs) in Singapore, competition in the telecom industry has intensified. 
Despite a marginal increase in mobile subscribers over recent years, many telecom providers are competing for the same customer base. 
Understanding churn behaviour is crucial for businesses to develop strategies that reduce customer attrition and improve loyalty.

Dataset

We use the Telco Customer Churn dataset, which contains customer demographic details, contract information, and usage data. 

The dataset includes features such as:

CustomerID
Gender
Senior Citizen Status
Contract Type
Payment Method
Tenure (Months)
Monthly Charges
Total Charges
Churn (Target Variable: Yes/No)

Project Workflow

1. Data Preprocessing
  - Load and clean the dataset
  - Handle missing values and incorrect data formats
  - Perform feature engineering and transformations

2. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
  - Visualising customer attributes and churn distribution
  - Identifying correlations between churn and key features
  - Statistical analysis to determine significant predictors

3. Machine Learning Models
   - Logistic Regression
   - Decision Tree Classifier
   - Model evaluation using accuracy, confusion matrix, and error metrics

4. Model Validation & Optimisation
   - Train-Test split methodology
   - Cross-validation techniques
   - Hyper-parameter tuning for improved performance

Results & Insights

Identified key factors that contribute to customer churn
Developed predictive models with competitive accuracy
Provided actionable recommendations for reducing churn

Technologies Used

Python (Pandas, NumPy, Scikit-learn, Statsmodels)
Data Visualisation (Matplotlib, Seaborn)
Machine Learning Algorithms (Logistic Regression, Decision Trees)

How to Run the Project

1. Run the Jupyter Notebook:
   jupyter notebook churn_analysis.ipynb

2. Follow the steps outlined in the notebook to analyse the data and train models.

Conclusion

This project provides valuable insights into customer churn patterns and predictive 
modelling techniques. The findings can be used by telecom companies to improve customer 
retention and optimise marketing strategies.
